
# BC-1.5.11 Current limitations

After this piece of sci-fi, we think it is more than enough time to bring us back to reality and the here & now. Therefore, the final section of part 1.5:  "current limitations & what is needed for adoption". Bottom line: open public blockchains are in their infancy. As you know, blockchains already existed in the '70s from the previous century. Currently, we have open public blockchains, but only for ten years so far. So, it's best to compare this technology with a 10-year-old kid. There are, of course, a multitude of limitations at this age. You can compare the status of blockchain technology best with the internet technologies of the mid-90s. It doesn't work all that well, a bit, but has a lot of potential. It needs to scale, and every time it scales, somebody else invents something new. And then we need to scale again.

## The examples
Other than scaling and privacy related issues, we need to tackle many more challenges.

#1 An important one is blockchain governance. How are you going to govern this scaling? Every time you need to upgrade something, you, as an entire community and ecosystem, all around the world, need to reach a consensus. Normally there was a coordinating trusted third party. Now you don't have a trusted coordinating party, so we need to do this on our own. Blockchain governance is a significant one because it sets the route: "how do we go from here?". Do we go for scaling to a more centralized version, or do we go to a more secure version, or do we go for speed? It all depends on your opinion, of course: what is it going to be used for? So, keep that in mind: what is our final use case?

Things can get quite heated as well, as you will see in the following courses: different people, different opinions. Hence the arrangement of governance is quite the issue and worthy of an entirely different course. Which we will eventually make for you, of course, called "blockchain governance".

#2 The second (limitation) is the lack of developers in the community. We need more developers. We need more people to build these blockchains and infrastructures! And of course, a lot of people are already migrating towards these new technologies. A lot of good developers are already building every day in and day out. Still, to reach full global adoption, we need more people. More importantly:  we also need more multidisciplinary people! If you check the statistics on Bitcoin searches: 90% is male, so we need more females. Also, we need all kinds of cultures and ages. The average age is approximately between 25 and 40'ish. We need younger and older people.
Finally, we need a more balanced developing ecosystem. Suppose you currently look at bitcoin nodes spread across the world. In that case, you will see an unhealthy division over the wealthier countries and hardly any activity in less developed regions. We can learn from each other, learn from different opinions, and we want to prevent something that happened to Google once: it got racist, it got biased. We want to eliminate bias as much as possible. How do we do that? By including way, way more people (will all types of different backgrounds!) This is also one of the main reasons we offer these courses for free: we want to make digital technologies accessible for anyone. Equal chances. Whether you are African, Asian, European, American. Whether you're male/female. No matter who you are, wherever you are: we want to offer you a chance.

#3 Hence, of course, in multidisciplinary complexity, we try to tackle the vast amounts of courses that we're going to make for you. Try to find your  [IKIGAI](https://www.forbes.com/sites/chrismyers/2018/02/23/how-to-find-your-ikigai-and-transform-your-outlook-on-life-and-business/). Your specialism. Where you can contribute to the ecosystem (and earn), try to see where your energy lies and head in that direction. Of course, mentioned once before: don't neglect the other disciplines because you can learn many things. When you are, for example, a developer, don't forget to look at the economic incentives. If you are an economist: don't neglect the IT component. You get me.

#4 Tribalism: also relates to governance. What do I mean by that? Everybody (generalization alert!) seems to be focused on their blockchain. Their blockchain is the best, and all the other blockchains are scams. Also known as, for example, a Bitcoin maximalism or Bitcoin extremism (in case of Bitcoin), or Bitcoin cash "versus" Bitcoin core or Ethereum versus Ethereum classic. Tribalism makes you wear "one direction eyeglasses", which can make it quite challenging to keep an open mind to other opportunities than your current "team".

#5: Let's go to the scams & hacks. Of course, criminals use this technology as well. I don't think this should be called a limitation. This is proof that it works because criminals are at the forefront of risk and reward, and they need to know that they can trust the technology when they use it. The very first shoes were used by criminals, as well as the very first cars, to get away from the bank robbery. New technologies offer new possibilities, and criminals are most often the first ones grabbing those possibilities. Hence, of course, our solution: education! By educating you, we try to offer you a toolset, which you can use to prevent getting scammed and, for example, buying stuff that's worthless because you can now actually make an estimated guess on your own: "Is this worth something, make these claims in the white paper hold?" "Do I understand what they're saying?"
"Can they indeed scale, decentralized and in a secure manner, or is it just a hoax?" Deliberately or not: people can also actually think that they can build it but don't understand the very basics, which can perhaps be even more dangerous.

#6 The scaling limitations: how are we going to scale?
Are we going to scale on layer 1, on the blockchain itself? Are we going to build an infrastructure around it ("layer 2")? Or are we going to make the blockchains interoperable? So, connect the blockchains. Are we going to make more giant blocks? Very, very interesting stuff. Also, like all the other things: worth an entire section on itself ("scaling blockchains"). I'm going fast, and I'm going fast here for a reason: we are going to describe all these individual topics later. I forgot to mention that we will explain them all in a separate section (later in level 3).

#7 Currently, the technique is way too techie. My mother, for example, has no idea what I'm talking about, she doesn't even care, and all she wants to know: "how can I use it". I always like the example of trying to send an email at the beginning of the 90s. Try to compare this with how easy it is nowadays:  my mother uses email, WhatsApp, and the internet. She couldn't have used the internet 20 years ago, just as she can't use blockchain technology now. She most likely will be able to use it within 10-15 years, which means it needs to get more user-friendly. A lot of suitable applications are working on it. Many good developer teams are working their way towards that user-friendliness. Still, this time you are responsible for your data, which increases your responsibility.

#8 Discussions about monetary policy: I think we've said enough in that regard. Monetary policy, inflation, deflation, gold versus non-backed digital ledger money. I think we can skip this part.

#9 Legal framework: very, very important and often underestimated by people from the blockchain scene. But still, "To get adopted in certain regions, you need to have a certain legal framework". That's what we always used to think. But now, for the very first time, we are talking about a global framework: a global legal framework because this is not a technique that you can catch in one specific region. It is a global distributed ledger, so this means that for the first time in human history if you want to legalize something like this and if you're going to regulate it, you have a few options:
you either need to get all the countries set in on one legal framework, which of course, isn't going to happen. And if that's going to happen, I think people should focus on some more pressing matters on hand. For example, the increase in climate, sustainability, poverty, privacy legislation. "Stuff" like that. And not prohibit a decentralized p2p payment system, which might be the next economic infrastructure. You can't tackle this (locally). So, it's a global technology that needs an international legal framework.

If you want to adopt it in a country fully, in a region, there the legal framework kicks in. It can help spur this innovation or can delay it. But more than a pause, I don't think you can do more than that for now. Because there will be some country or some technique that pops up that figures out a way around. So, I'm inquisitive in this regard how we're going to tackle it (dilemma of decent global legislation). The question remains: which country is willing to miss the boat possibly? Who can afford this?

#10 Energy consumption: I don't think we've adequately discussed this in this session. We will do so in further sessions as well. To sum up the energy discussion: the energy used in a block is also the security of that block. So, the more energy you put in a block, the more secure a block is. So, it isn't wasteful unless you don't use this blockchain or the transactions properly. So, it all depends on if you think that the use of Bitcoin is wasteful. I think you should ask the people in Venezuela this. Or the people in Hong Kong or any other people are trying to escape some totalitarian regime. Is increasing the tx cost efficiency and reducing the three main risks caused by TTP indeed a waste of energy? Or do we need to discuss the real problem here: how is it still possible in 2020 that miners are allowed to use dirty energy to mine? I think you know where my opinion lies.

#11 Ownership of keys. 25% (calculated) by blockchain analysis are estimated to be gone forever because people lost their private keys. You can't call the Bitcoin helpdesk. A lot of responsibility = a lot of power, and a lot of power = a lot of responsibility. Of course, this is not the only user-friendliness that needs working on!

#12 Costs from merchants to individuals. We've discussed this already as well. This shift of cost will go from merchants who currently pay the fee to individuals. Because I now pay you, the merchant, I need to pay the mining transaction fee. This will be lower than the 2-3% based on what you're buying. If it's just a 1$ croissant, then it's more. But as soon as you start paying more than 10 to 15 cents (as a 2-3% of, for example, a 5$ transaction), it would be the other way around. So, there's a shift there: it will look less customer-friendly, but prices will drop because the owner/ the merchant has less cost; hence it will be more user-friendly in the long run. Once again: it depends on the fee of the amount you are buying.

#13 Adoption and user functionality, we discussed this. See above + it is currently too techie, too much of a hassle for the average person to ditch their current apps. The back end might be better (decentralized data sovereignty), but that doesn't mean anything if you can't use the app because it can't handle the amount of transaction (scalability) or the interface is unclear. Time is needed here.

Etc. etc., we will discuss the others in depth in levels 2 and 3! Next up, it is finally time for "smart contracts"!

## Conclusion

Public blockchains are in their infancy and harbor several limitations discussed in this session. However, time will tell if gifted developers from the open-source community can harbor enough skills to realize this new digital infrastructure of the future. I do not doubt that they will succeed. Still, the question remains: will this be a decentralized future or once again a centralized spin-off of something that was once intended to be decentralized (like the internet once was).


## Further readings

* [Ikigai model](https://www.forbes.com/sites/chrismyers/2018/02/23/how-to-find-your-ikigai-and-transform-your-outlook-on-life-and-business/)
* [Bitcoin Energy consumption #1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PBZm2sucS_o)
* [Bitcoin Energy consumption #2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2T0OUIW89II)
* [Bitcoin Energy consumption #3](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uvFqEofdAZ0)





